Dear Peter and Han:

Two experts in the field have reviewed your manuscript, and I have read it as
well.  While both reviewers found merit in the manuscript, both also had
substantial concerns about the interpretability and impact of the results.
Your manuscript would need to be substantially revised to be acceptable for
publication in GENETICS.  You can read their reviews at
http://submit.genetics.org.

Please understand that incremental changes will not be sufficient.  Adding
simulations to strengthen key claims will be necessary, particularly addressing
the impacts of mutation rate and recombination rate variation with more depth,
the concern regarding PC switching (Reviewer 1), and the concern regarding the
impacts of variation in missingness by sub-population (Reviewer 2).

I look forward to receiving a revised manuscript. I expect it could be
submitted within 90 days, but please let me know if you think you will need
more time to complete the revision. A revised manuscript will be considered a
resubmission, and will be sent out for review.

If you have questions about the reviews or this message, please contact me.

Sincerely,
John Novembre
Associate Editor

Nick Barton
Senior Editor


********************
Reviewer 1 Comments for the Author:

Review of Li & Ralph "Local PCA Shows How the Effect of Population Structure Differs
Along the Genome"

The authors present a new way to examine the differences between different
regions of the genome, based on taking PCA on windows and comparing the results
for each window.  They show, in three datasets, that it finds some known
inversions as well as potentially some new inversions, and also claim to find
some other features such as background selection.

The paper is generally well written and clear; it addresses an important
problem, and clearly makes some progress on it. However, it suffers from having
no grounding in either theory or empirical demonstration that it really can find
the structures that are claimed. I find the arguments that it finds inversions
compelling, though not watertight, and I am not yet convinced that it is finding
ubiquitous background selection.  To make this claim, significant extra work is
required.

In short, the approach is interesting but not sufficiently explored to produce
compelling evidence for the implications that are claimed.  Putting a large
amount of effort into simulations may alleviate these concerns somewhat.

Specific points: What does this method find? I'm concerned about a) variation in
the recombination rate, and b) variation in the mutation rate, creating spurious
structure. The first possibility is that massively varying information quantity
within windows could lead to a small number of such windows having their
orientation reversed: that is, PC1 becomes PC2 and vice versa. (Or PC2 and PC3
could switch). This would lead to such windows having unusual properties and
hence appearing as evidence of an inversion.

I do agree with the authors that significant outliers would be found at
inversions. However, even if the PC switching does not occur, or the model could
handle it, the evidence for selection is weaker.  If the two types of variation
described above exist, with no selection, I would still expect a "continuous
triangle" of results (as seen left of Fig 2, top left of Fig 6) with extrema
described by windows with the most information, and points placed at different
extremum having low recombination rate (because by chance, these will get an
approximately fixed local tree, corresponding on average to the genome-wide
population structure).

Addressing this is likely quite hard, though the authors may be able to think of
something that separates these effects from selection.

Other points:

* Throughout, things are claimed without evidence:
  p6 "here, we use k=2..."  - you have to show that k>2 is the same.
  p15 "We also found nearly identical results when choosing shorter windows of
1,000 SNPs" - again, show this.
  p15 "or choosing windows of equal length in base pairs rather than SNPs" -
once again.

* Using 2 PCs is common practice: only if this is the end of an analysis and the
PCA was done for visualisation. Here you are using it for something so should
keep all the relavant PCs.

* I'm surprised that PCAdmix isn't referenced. It is using a very similar
method, albeit with different goals. In particular, the approach of placing all
points into a single, genome-wide PC space solves many of the problems that this
approach has (though I agree there may be benefits to the approach described here)


*****
Reviewer 2 Comments for the Author:

Li and Ralph present an approach based on local PCA to detect local heterogeneity due to
chromosomal inversions and background selection. They apply their approach to human,
drosophila melanogaster, and medicago truncatula.

This is an interesting and well written paper. It was a pleasant read. I have three main general
comments:

- Related work: The authors provide an introduction of the main concepts, as well as some
intuition of what the method is doing and how, but I found comparison to previous approaches
to be somewhat missing. To some extent, this is due to the fact that the main goal of their
analysis is somewhat vaguely "finding heterogeneity", which leads to the applications of
detecting chromosomal inversions and evidence for background selection. It would help to
have a well defined set of hypotheses, test the method’s accuracy  using simulation (see next
comment), and compare to previous efforts in similar domains.

- Validation: In several occasions, the authors seem to introduce a potential problem in their
approach, and provide a solution to it. This is generally rather intuitive, but it would really help
to have simulations of some sort to show that the issue arises and leads to a problem, and that
their approach does address the specific problem.

- Results: The results are interesting, but they do not seem to provide much new biological
insight.


Other comments:

The use of weighted PCA to cope with unbalanced sample size could be better demonstrated.
Although the current explanation makes intuitive sense, this approach does not seem to be
used in previous work. The authors could design a simulation that supports their approach.

It is conceivable that some subpopulations will have more missingness in some windows. That
may skew the resulting PCs by selecting different sample sizes for the different windows (as
discussed in Appendix B) . This could distort the PCs, so that variation reflects underlying
variation in missingness. Would be good to discuss this potential issue and provide simulations.

Appendix A: when using jackknife to estimate variance, each window is being divided in 10
"independent" resampling units. Due to LD, these 10 blocks are likely correlated, which would
bias the estimates of variance. This is probably not a problem because both signal and noise
could be equally biased, but the authors may want to consider this potential issue. I wonder if
the correlation with recombination rate may be partially explained by this.

Is it possible to explain the results of Figure 6 just considering neutral variation in local
ancestry due to recent admixture? This may explain why ancestry seems to explain a fair
amount of variance in the lower plots of Fig 6. Local PCA has been previously used by others to
detect local ancestry blocks, e.g. see the PCAdmix approach by Brisbin et al. The authors
discuss the possibility that admixture is driving the differentiation, but do not test whether their
observations agree with neutrality.

"to remove the effect of artifacts such as mutation rate variation, we also rescale each
approximate covariance matrix to be of similar size (precisely, so that the underlying data
matrix has trace norm equal to one". This potential issue is a bit unclear to me, since I would
expect that scaling the volume of local trees would not result in changed distances in PC
space. Perhaps the authors could show via simulations that this creates a problem, and that the
normalization addresses it.

Figure 7: are MDS coordinates correlated with recombination rates in this case?

Application: is what the authors seem to be proposing not already accounted for by linear
mixed model association approaches? If not, this should be clarified. Either way, this paragraph
could be dropped.


Some comments on the text, typos and other minor style-related points

Introduction: "it is not necessarily clear what aspects of demography should be included in the
concept." I find it a bit weird to describe selection as an "aspect of demography". Although it
could be seen as such within a coalescent framework, that seems to be just a useful
representation. The authors may consider rewording`.

Paragraph starting in "Since the definition...". The notation is a bit unclear. Please check that it
is clear which PC the text refers to.

Would the authors be able to provide a sense for the directionality of effects in Figure 4? It
would be interesting if the authors tried to further characterize regions that are similar due to
higher recombination rates. E.g. is there more/less density of polymorphisms in these regions?

Page 13: typo: "figures 6 and 6".

Typo in abstract, line 6 ", We show" -> ". We show".

Typo: end of introduction "an visualization". The whole sentence is a bit weird. The authors just
stated focus is on clustering, not on looking for outliers, but what does it mean that "we allow
ourselves to be surprised by unexpected signals in the data"?

"There has been substantial debate over the relative impacts of different forms of selection."
Citation needed.

"Results using larger numbers of PCs were nearly identical". It would be interesting to have a
supplementary table.

Table 1 legend seems a bit redundant. Columns are self-explanatory.

It would help to have numbered lines and references.
